# Betriebssystemsicherheit am Beispiel von Multics

> Converted from PDF | Pages: 49

---

© `SYSSEC`, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi

### Betriebssystemsicherheit mit Multics &
Trusted Execution Environments

### Prof. Dr.-Ing. Lucas Vincenzo Davi
Fakult‰t f¸r Informatik

Arbeitsgruppe Systemsicherheit [https://www.syssec.wiwi.uni-due.de/](https://www.syssec.wiwi.uni-due.de/)

### Universit‰t Duisburg-Essen
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit, Sommersemester 2025

-- 1 of 49 --

© `SYSSEC`, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi

## SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi 2

### Hardware
App

### Operating System
`CPU`

### Malware
Memory

### Exploits
bugs in applications

### Malware Infection
e.g., Zeus banking

trojan

### DRAM Bugs
e.g., Rowhammer

### CPU Bugs
e.g., Spectre

### Kernel Exploits
e.g., Stagefright

### The Threat Landscape
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025

-- 2 of 49 --

© `SYSSEC`, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi

## SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi

### Introduction
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 3

- In this chapter we introduce and examine the secure operating system Multics
```
• Multics was the first modern operating system
• The Multics project introduced many operating system concepts that are widely used in
operating systems today
• Virtual memory
• Hierarchical file system
• Moreover, fundamental secure operating system concepts were invented and
implemented in Multics
• Reference monitor
• Protection rings
• Multilevel security policies
-- 3 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 4
History
Publication of
Compatible Timesharing
System (CTSS)
developed by the MIT
1961
Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA) of the US Department of
Defense starts the project MAC
(Multi-Access Computer)
1962
Start of the Multics
project merged
from the work of
CTSS and MAC
1963
Bell Labs
joins the
Multics
Project
1965
Development takes
longer than expected.
Bell drops out of the
project
1969
Commercial
announcement
of Multics
1973
Development of
Multics is terminated.
Costs: $7 million and
only 80 licenses sold
until 1985
-- 4 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Processes and Segments
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 5
• The fundamental concepts in Multics are processes and segments
• Segments are organized in a hierarchy of directories
Process
All executable content in Multics
(i.e., they run program code)
Each process has its own virtual
address space in memory
A process is divided into
segments
Segment
Subdivision of a process address
space
All resources (e.g., code, data,
I/O devices etc.) that may be
accessed by a process
-- 5 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Segmentation in Multics
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 6
• Segments are addressable either locally or by their name from secondary
storage (e.g., from disk)
• Each process holds its own descriptor segment for locally addressable segments
− The descriptor segment contains descriptor segment words (SDWs)
− Each SDW points to a directly addressable segment in system memory
− Loading SDWs into the process descriptor segment is performed by the Multics supervisor
-- 6 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Multics Login Process
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 7
Password Segment
Disk Device
Supervisor
AS Descriptor Segment
User Process
Password Segment	Password SDW
Reference
Monitor
Answering Service
(AS)
User
1. send password 2. request password segment
3. authorize
segment load
4. retrieve password segment
5. create user
process
If the verification of the
user‘s password is
successful, the answering
service creates a user
process with appropriate
code and data segments
-- 7 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
The Supervisor and the Answering Service
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 8
The answering service
• Responsible for verifying the user‘s password
• To verify the password, the answering service needs the password segment from the file
system
• The loading of the password SDW to the answering service‘s descriptor segment must be
authorized and enforced by the supervisor
The Multics supervisor
• The supervisor implements the most trusted components of the Multics system
• Only the supervisor segments are assigned to ring 0 and ring 1
-- 8 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
The Reference Monitor
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 9
Notion of Reference monitor
• Combination of hardware and software responsible for enforcing the security policy of the
system
Reference monitor principles
1. Complete Mediation: Any access to information must be mediated by
the reference monitor. It must be impossible to bypass the reference
monitor.
2. Tamperproof (Isolation): The system must protect the reference monitor,
including its protection system from modification
3. Verifiable: The reference monitor must be small enough to be subject to
analysis and test in order to prove that the system enforces its security
goals
-- 9 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 10
Process Descriptor Segment in Multics
Segment Descriptor Word 0
(e.g. code, libraries)
Segment Descriptor Word 1
Segment Descriptor Word 2
Segment Descriptor Word N
…
…
Segment 0 Descriptor Base Register
Segment N
…
-- 10 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
The Segment Descriptor Word (SDW)
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 11
• The SDW contains the following fields
1. The segment‘s address in memory
2. The length of the segment
3. Access indicators
− Ring Brackets (r1, r2, r3) used for the protection ring model
− The process permissions for the segment (Read, Write, Execute) used for Access Control Lists
− Gate: A list of valid entry points to higher-privileged rings. This field is used by gate segments and
is needed in the protection ring model for ring transitions.
r1	Address Length r2 r3 E	W	R Gate
-- 11 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Code and Gate segments
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 12
• Notion of code segment
• Segments that contain code are referred to as code segments (i.e., the segment is
executable)
• Notion of gate segment
• A gate segment is a special kind of code segment that uses the gate field in the SDW to
provide valid entry points to higher-privileged protection rings
• If a process invokes code that needs to run in a higher-privileged protection ring, then the
process has to enter the higher-privileged protection ring through a gate segment
• Therefore, a gate segment provides a list of valid entry points (gate field) and the process
must start execution at one of these entry points
• At these entry points input arguments are validated in order to protect the invoked code
from malicious input originating from lower-privileged protection rings
-- 12 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Process Requesting a Segment
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 13
Segment 1
Disk Device
Supervisor
Process Descriptor Segment
Process
Segment 1	Segment Descriptor Word 1
Reference
Monitor
1. Request segment using
its file path
(e.g. /root/trunk/branch)2. Authorize segment load
3. The segment is loaded into
system memory and a new
corresponding SDW is appended
to the descriptor segment
-- 13 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Basic Principles of Protection Rings
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 14
Notion of Protection Rings
• Protection rings form a hierarchical layering from the most privileged ring (ring 0) to the least
privileged ring
Protection rings in Multics
• Multics provides 64 protection rings
• 8 protection rings were implemented in the hardware
• The remaining 56 protection rings were implemented in software
• The Multics supervisor assigns the ring numbers to processes by using a special processor
register1 that holds the current ring number of a process
• Ring numbers of segments are stored directly in SDWs
1Effecively, the IPR register (instruction pointer) specifies the current ring of execution
-- 14 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
General Example on Protection Rings
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 15
• The rings of privilege show the most
privileged ring in the center with less
privileged rings as we move outward
• The innermost rings are occupied by the
operating system
• In intermediate rings users are doing their
programming
• The outermost rings can be assigned to
restricted users
RING 0
Kernel
Ring 1
Operating System
Ring 2 Operating System
Ring 3 System Application
Ring 4 User Programs
Ring 5 User Programs
Ring 6 Restricted User
Ring 7 Restricted User
-- 15 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Memory Access in Protection Rings
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 16
Higher-privileged rings have at least access to all memory of lower-privileged rings
• Processes in higher-privileged rings tend to share memory across all processes
• Processes (e.g., user processes) in lower-privileged rings are isolated from one another
Ring 2
Ring 3
Ring 4
Ring 4
Memory Process A
Ring 3
Memory Process B
Ring 2
Memory Process C
-- 16 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Protection Rings in Modern Systems
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 17
• Intel provides 4 protection rings
• However, modern operating systems (e.g., Windows and Linux) only use ring 0
and ring 3, because some hardware architectures of the past only supported two
privilege levels Ring 3
(e.g.user programs)
Ring 2
(e.g. shared libraries)
Ring 1
(e.g. system calls)
Ring 0
(Kernel)
-- 17 of 49 --
paluno – The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology
@ SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
Permission Checks in Multics
18
-- 18 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Introduction
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 19
• The Multics protection system consists of the following three models
− Access Control List (ACL)
− Rings and Brackets
− Multilevel Security
• If a process requests access to a segment all three policies/models must
authorize the request
• Policy Classification
• Discretionary Access Control (DAC): At the discretion of the owner
• ACL, Rings and Brackets
• Mandatory Access Control (MAC): Immutable system-wide policies instantiated at boot
• Multilevel Security
-- 19 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Basic Principles of Access Controls Lists in Multics
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 20
ACL in the Context of Multics
• Basically, a list of users and their access permissions
• Each segment and directory is associated with its own access control list (ACL)
• Each ACL entry defines a user identity of processes and the permissions that processes
running on behalf of that user have
-- 20 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
User IDs in Multics
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 21
• The full user ID is a three-component name: Person.Project.Tag
1. Person: The name of the user
2. Project: The name of group the user is working in
3. Tag: Indicates if the user is using the system interactively (m) or as an “absentee (batch)” user
(a)
• Example Jim.ProjectX.*
− The user Jim is working within the group ProjectX and uses the system both interactively and
as an absentee user
− The wildcard (*) means that any person/project/tag is acceptable
-- 21 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Permission Modes
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 22
Permission modes for segments
• read (r)
• write (w)
• execute (e)
• null (n)
Permission modes for directories
• Status (s): List the contents of a directory
• Modify (m): Delete objects and modify attributes of objects from a directory
• Append (a): Add a new object to a directory
A process gains access to a segment, if the associated user has an entry in the ACL
that permits the requested operation
-- 22 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Example on ACLs for Segments
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 23
• ACL for the file /projects/X/accounting
Permissions User Description
n Tom.*.* Tom has no access to the file
rwe Jim.ProjectX.* Jim working for ProjectX has
read/write/execute permissions
r Backup.SysDaemon.* The Backup Daemon can read the
file
rw *.SysAdmin.a Batch users of the SysAdmin group
are able to read and write to the
file
-- 23 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Example on ACLs for Segments
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 24
• ACL for the directory /projects/X/
Permissions User Description
sma Jim.ProjectX.* Jim working for ProjectX has
status/modify/append permissions
s Backup.SysDaemon.* The Backup daemon can list the
contents of the directory
sm *.SysAdmin.m Interactive users of the SysAdmin
group have status and modify
permissions
-- 24 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Motivation for Protection Rings
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 25
• A descriptor segment without ring brackets defines a single domain of execution
− A set of access capabilities associated with a process is referred to as domain
− The procedures executed as part of a process have all the same access capabilities
-- 25 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Motivation for Protection Rings
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 26
However, sometimes it is necessary to change the process’s access capabilities
during program execution
• A user program invokes a supervisor procedure (e.g., a system call)
• starting an I/O operation
• or changing the access control list of a segment
• The system call needs more privileges (in order to execute successfully) than the user process
has
• Thus, for the time the system call executes, the user process needs extended privileges
Associating multiple domains with a single user process is accomplished in Multics
by protection rings
-- 26 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Basic Principles of Rings and Brackets
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 27
• Protection rings for a segment are stored in the SDW
− Each segment is associated with a ring bracket
• Depending on the process’s current ring (r) and the ring bracket (r1, r2, r3) of the
segment, access is permitted or denied
r1	Address Length r2 r3 E	W	R Gate
-- 27 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Basic Principles of Rings and Brackets
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 28
• Access Brackets: Defines ranges of rings that are allowed to read and write
segments (i.e., processes whose current ring number is within the defined range
are allowed to read/write to the segment)
• Call Brackets: Defines ranges of rings that are allowed to execute code
-- 28 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Access Brackets
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 29
• Access Bracket: (r1, r2 )
− r1: The highest ring which can write to the segment
− r2: The highest ring which can read the segment
− Always r1 ≤ r2 : r1 is more privileged than r2
• Possible relations (current protection ring is r)
− r ≤ r1: The process can read and write to the segment
− r1 < r ≤ r2: The process can read the segment, but is not allowed to write to the segment
− r2 < r: The process can neither read nor write to the segment
-- 29 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Example for Access Brackets
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 30
• Examples (current protection ring is r = 4)
− (5, 6): Process is allowed to read and write to the segment
− Because r < r1 ≤ r2
− (3, 4): Process is allowed to read, but is not allowed to write to the segment
− Because r1 < r ≤ r2
− (3, 3): Process has no access to the segment
− Because r1 ≤ r2 < r
-- 30 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Call Brackets
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 31
• Call Bracket: (r2, r3)
− r2: The highest ring which can read the segment
− r3: The highest ring which can execute code of the segment
− For gate segments: r2 < r3: r2 is more privileged than r3
− For all non-gate segments: r2 = r3
− According to the transition rules defined in the following, a ring transition to a higher-privileged
ring can only be enforced if r2 < r3
− To identify if a code segment is a gate segment, it is sufficient to examine the call bracket: if r2 < r3
then the segment is a gate segment
-- 31 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Ring transitions
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 32
• Ring transitions occur when a code segment belonging to a different ring is
invoked by a process
• Two possible ring transitions
1. Transition to a higher-privileged ring
2. Transition to a lower-privileged ring
• A ring transition to a higher-privileged ring requires entry through a gate
segment that validates input arguments originating from lower-privileged rings
− Argument validation in Multics is quite sophisticated; it features explicit and implicit
pointer routines
-- 32 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Ring Bracket Check on Code Segments
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 33
Ring Number
Descriptor Base Register
Process
SDW 1
SDW 2
New SDW
Is current ring
allowed to
execute SEG-A?
Is a ring
transition
needed?
Update ring number
Map SEG-A to memory
Create new SDW Deny
Execution
SEG-A
SEG-A
Segment 1
Segment 2
Disk Device
no
yes
yes
Process Descriptor
Segment
1. Request code segment SEG-A
Supervisor 2. Authorize segment load
-- 33 of 49 --
paluno – The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology
@ SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
Flowchart for Ring Bracket Check
34
-- 34 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 35
Deny
Execution
yes
Is r > r3 ?
Is r2 < r <= r3 ?
Is r1 <= r <= r2 ?
Initiate
ring check
Input
1. Current ring number r
2. Ring Bracket: (r1, r2), (r2, r3)
3. Entry address to the
segment
no
no
Is entry address
in gate field?
r’ = r1
Allow
Execution
Validate input
arguments
Arguments
bad?
yes
no
yes
r’ = r2
no
yes
no
yes
-- 35 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
The Supervisor’s Permission Check
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 36
• We now examine the possible results of the supervisor’s permission check
depicted on the last slide
• A process running in ring r requests invocation of a code segment with an access
bracket (r1, r2) and a call bracket (r2, r3)
Cases Description
r3 < r • Execution not allowed
r2 < r ≤ r3 • Execution allowed through a gate
• Ring transition to the higher-privileged r2
r1 ≤ r ≤ r2 • Execution allowed
• No ring transition
r < r1 • Execution allowed
• Ring transition to the lower-privileged ring r1
-- 36 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 37
Case: r3 < r
• The process is not allowed to execute the code segment
− The process’s current ring number is not within the range of rings (0, r3) allowed to execute
the code segment
• Examples
1. r = 6, access bracket (0, 0), call bracket (0, 5)
• The process requests invocation of a gate segment (r2 < r3)
• Since r > r3 (6 > 5) execution of the gate segment is denied
2. r = 4, access bracket (1, 3), call bracket (3, 3)
• The process requests invocation of a non-gate segment (r2 = r3)
• Since r > r3 (4 > 3) execution of the code segment is denied
-- 37 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 38
Case: r2 < r ≤ r3
• Description
• The process requests a code segment of a higher-privileged ring
• This case only occurs if the code segment is a gate segment (r2 < r3)
• A popular use case for such ring transitions are system calls
• Under certain conditions, the process is allowed to execute the gate segment
• Condition 1: Entry address to the segment must be defined in the gate field of the SDW
• Condition 2: Argument validation is successful
• Ring transition rule 1
• If r2 < r ≤ r3 the process‘s current execution ring r is changed to r‘, whereas r‘ = r2
-- 38 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 39
Case: r2 < r ≤ r3
• Examples
• We assume that argument validation was successful and that the process provided a valid
entry address to the segment
1. r = 4, access bracket (0, 2), call bracket (2, 6)
• According to ring transition rule 1, a ring transition to r’ = r2 = 2 is enforced
• Privileges of the process are enhanced during the time the gate procedure executes
• Upon return of the gate procedure, the execution is resumed to ring 4
2. r = 4, access bracket (3, 3), call bracket (3, 4)
• Ring transition to r‘ = r2 = 3
-- 39 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Case: r1 ≤ r ≤ r2
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 40
• The process is allowed to execute the code segment
− First, the process’s current ring number is within the range of rings (0, r3) allowed to execute
the code segment
− Second, the process‘s current ring number is within the following range of rings: (r1, r2)
− This is the only case where the process can execute the code segment without changing its
ring of execution
• Examples
1. r = 2, access bracket (1, 3), call bracket (3, 3)
• The process requests invocation of a non-gate segment (r2 = r3)
• The code segment is executed in ring 2
2. r = 2, access bracket (1, 3), call bracket (3, 5)
• The process requests invocation of a gate segment (r2 < r3)
• The gate segment is executed in ring 2
-- 40 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Case: r < r1
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 41
• The process is allowed to execute the code segment
− The process requests invocation of a code segment belonging to a lower-privileged ring
• Ring transition rule 2
− If r < r1 the current execution ring of the process r is changed to r‘, whereas r‘ = r1
• Examples
1. r = 0, access bracket (1, 1), call bracket (1, 1)
• According to ring transition rule 2, a ring transition to r‘ = r1 = 1 is enforced
• Privileges of the process are decreased during the time the code executes
• Upon return of the invoked code, the process’s execution is resumed to ring 0
2. r = 0, access bracket (3, 5), call bracket (5, 5)
• Ring transition to r’ = r1 = 3
-- 41 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Multilevel Security implemented in Multics
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 42
• Multics pioneered the enforcement of Multilevel Security
− Each directory stores a mapping from each segment to its secrecy level
− Further, Multics stores a mapping from each process to its secrecy level
− The MLS policy enforced by Multics realizes the Bell-La Padula (BLP) model and prevents
information leakage
− Typical secrecy levels: top-secret, secret, confidential, and unclassified
− MLS policy
1. Write: A process can only write to segments of the same or higher-privileged secrecy levels
2. Read: A process can only read from segments of the same or lower-privileged secrecy levels
3. Read/Write: To read and write to a segment/directory the secrecy levels of the process and the
segment/directory have to be the same
-- 42 of 49 --
paluno – The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology
@ SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
Influence on today‘s
operating systems
43
-- 43 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Influence
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 44
• Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie were hired by Bell in the 1960s
• After Bell dropped out of the project, Thompson and Ritchie led a team to create
UNIX
• Both won Turing Awards in 1983
• Commands like “ls”, “pwd” and “mail” were originally created in Multics
-- 44 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 45
Multics
• The Multics project introduced many operating system concepts that are widely
used in operating systems today
• Segmented and virtual memory
• Shared memory multiprocessors
• Hierarchical file systems
• Online reconfiguration
• Reference monitor
• Protection rings
• Multilevel security policies
• Dynamic linking
Windows reboots to configure
new Software
Modern systems only use 2
ring levels
-- 45 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Conclusion on Multics
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 46
• Multics was the first modern operating system
• Many important secure operating system concepts were pioneered in Multics,
such as reference monitor, protection rings, etc.
• Multics realizes the reference monitor principles complete mediation and
tamperproof. However, Multics TCB is too large to be formally verified
• Subsequent work in security kernels aimed to reduce the TCB complexity
− A security kernel is defined as the combination of hardware and software that implements
the reference monitor
− The design includes hardware mechanisms leveraged by a minimal trusted computing base
(TCB)
− Security Kernel projects especially focused on verifiability
− Therefore the TCB has to be as minimal as possible to allow reasonable verification
-- 46 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi
Literature and References
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 47
• A. Bensoussan, C.T. Clingen, and R.C. Daley:
“The Multics Virtual Memory: Concepts and Design”
http://www.multicians.org/multics-vm.html
• M. Gasser: “Building a Secure Computer System”
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242363259_Building_a_Secure_Computer_S
ystem
• Technical paper of Honeywell: “The Multics Virtual Memory”
http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/honeywell/multics/haley/AG95_part2_Jun72.pdf
• The Multicians web site presents the story and features of Multics:
http://www.multicians.org/
• J.H. Saltzer and M.D. Schroeder: “A Hardware Architecture for Implementing Protection
Rings”
http://www.multicians.org/protection.html
-- 47 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
SYSTEMSICHERHEIT
Prof. Dr. L. Davi Vorlesung Cybersicherheit SoSe 2025 04.07.2025 48
Book Reference on
OS Security
including Multics
• T. Jaeger: “Operating System Security”
Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2008
-- 48 of 49 --
© SYSSEC, Prof. Dr. Lucas Davi
Vielen Dank f¸r Ihre Aufmerksamkeit
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Lucas Vincenzo Davi
Fakult‰t f¸r Informatik
Arbeitsgruppe Systemsicherheit
Universit‰t Duisburg-Essen
Vorlesung Cybersicherheit, Sommersemester 2025
-- 49 of 49 --